Governance Dashboard (#200)
rsksmart/devportal: docs/04-resources/04-tutorials/governance-dashboard.md

> ---

Reviewer: Move the governance dashboard to the Runes folder, it's part of the Runes series

sidebar_position: 300
title: Create a Governance Voting Dashboard
sidebar_label: Create a Governance Voting Dashboard
tags: [Governance Voting Dashboard, rootstock, tutorials, rsk, ERC20, blockchain, defi]
description: "This project is a Governance Voting Dashboard built on the Rootstock blockchain. It allows users to create and vote for teams using governance tokens (ERC20 tokens). "
---

> This project is a **Governance Voting Dashboard** built on the **Rootstock blockchain**. It allows users to create and vote for teams using governance tokens [ERC20 tokens](http://localhost:3000/concepts/glossary/#e). 

Reviewer: Kindly take out the localhost link

The voting is managed by a smart contract, making it decentralized and transparent. Each team has a unique name, a governance token, and a leader, and users can vote by transferring tokens to their preferred teams.

The dashboard is designed for token-based voting, where votes are reflected in a team's score. Higher scores indicate more community support for that team.

> ## Features Overview

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Features
```

    require(bytes(_teams[teamName].teamName).length == 0, "Team already added");
    require(bytes(_teamLeaders[teamLeaderAddress]).length == 0, "Leader already assigned to a team");

    IERC20 memeTokenContract = IERC20(memeTokenAddress);
    string memory memeTokenName = memeTokenContract.name();
    string memory memeTokenUri = memeTokenContract.getUri();

    _teamNames.push(teamName);
    _teamLeaders[teamLeaderAddress] = teamName;
    _teams[teamName] = TeamInfo(teamName, memeTokenName, memeTokenUri, memeTokenAddress, teamLeaderAddress, 0);
  }
```

* **`setReadyToVote()`**  
  Marks the contract as ready for voting. Only administrators can call this function.  
  ```
  function setReadyToVote() public onlyAdmins {
    _readyToVote = true;
  }
  ```

* **`reset()`**  
  Resets the contract's voting state and clears team data. Only administrators can execute this.
  ```
    function reset() public onlyAdmins {
    for (uint256 i; i < _teamNames.length; i++) {
      _readyToVote = false;
      _teamLeaders[_teams[_teamNames[i]].teamLeaderAddress] = "";
      _teams[_teamNames[i]] = TeamInfo("", "", "", address(0), address(0), 0);
    }
    _teamNames = [""];
  }
  ```
:::

> ## Prerequisites

Reviewer: Move prerequisites section before Features

Before you begin your journey into deploying smart contracts on the Rootstock blockchain, ensure you have the following essential tools set up:

-  **Node.js**

You will need Node.js installed on your machine to run the project locally. [Download](https://nodejs.org/en/download/package-manager) the latest LTS version, which is recommended for most users.

- **Web3 Wallet (Metamask)**

A Web3 wallet is required for signing transactions and interacting with the Rootstock network. This wallet will enable you to manage your cryptocurrencies and deploy your smart contracts securely.

## **Getting Started**

<Steps>
  <Step title="Clone the Repository">
     Clone the project repository to your local machine:

```
git clone https://github.com/rsksmart/rootstock-dynamic.git
```
  </Step>
  <Step title="Install Dependencies">
    
Navigate to the project directory and install dependencies with:

```
npm install
```
  </Step>
  <Step title="Set Up Environment Variables">
   

Create a .env file in the project root directory and populate it with the required environment variables as listed above.

> #### **Required Environment Variables**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Environment Variables
```

> Set the following environment variables in your .env file to ensure the project functions correctly:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set the following environment variables in your `.env` file to ensure the project functions correctly:
```

> #### **1. NEXT_PUBLIC_TEAM_MANAGER_ADDRESS**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### 1. NEXT_PUBLIC_TEAM_MANAGER_ADDRESS
```

> This is the address of the TeamsManager smart contract that will be deployed to the Rootstock network. It manages the voting and team data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the address of the `TeamsManager` smart contract that will be deployed to the Rootstock network. It manages the voting and team data.
```

<figure>
<img src="/img/resources/tutorials/governance-dashaboard/NEXT_PUBLIC_TEAM_MANAGER_ADDRESS.png" alt="NEXT_PUBLIC_TEAM_MANAGER_ADDRESS"/>
  <figcaption>NEXT_PUBLIC_TEAM_MANAGER_ADDRESS (fig 1.)</figcaption>
</figure>

:::note

> If you’re new to deploying contracts on Remix, check out this [tutorial](https://dev.rootstock.io/developers/quickstart/remix/) for more detailed steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See the guide on how to [deploy smart contracts on Rootstock using Remix](https://dev.rootstock.io/developers/quickstart/remix/) for more detailed steps.
```

:::

> * **How to get it**:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **How to get the contract address**:  
```

  * Deploy the TeamsManager.sol contract to the Rootstock network using RemixIDE, a popular tool for writing and deploying smart contracts.   
  * Once deployed, you’ll find the contract’s address in the Remix’s console. Copy this address.  
  * Paste this address into your .env file as shown below:

```
NEXT_PUBLIC_TEAM_MANAGER_ADDRESS=<Your_Team_Manager_Contract_Address>
```

> #### **2. NEXT_PUBLIC_RPC_URL**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### 2. NEXT_PUBLIC_RPC_URL
```

This is the RPC (Remote Procedure Call) URL that allows an application to interact with the Rootstock blockchain. An RPC URL is essentially a link to the blockchain network.

:::tip[Tip]

> If you’re unsure how to navigate the Rootstock RPC Dashboard, refer to the [Getting Started with Rootstock RPC API](https://dev.rootstock.io/developers/rpc-api/rootstock/setup/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to the [Getting Started with Rootstock RPC API](https://dev.rootstock.io/developers/rpc-api/rootstock/setup/) for more information.
```

:::

* **How to get it**:

    * Go to the [Rootstock RPC Dashboard](https://dashboard.rpc.rootstock.io/login) and create an account or log in.  
    * Once logged in, create a new project or access an existing one to generate a testnet RPC URL.  

>     * Copy the URL and add it to your .env file like so:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Copy the URL and add it to your .env file, see example below:
```

```
NEXT_PUBLIC_RPC_URL=<Your_Rootstock_RPC_URL>
```

> #### **3. NEXT_PUBLIC_EXPLORER**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### 3. NEXT_PUBLIC_EXPLORER
```

> This is the blockchain explorer URL, which lets you view transaction details on the Rootstock network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the blockchain explorer URL, which allows for viewing transaction details on the Rootstock network.
```

* **How to get it**:  

>   * For testnet (for testing purposes), use this URL: https://explorer.testnet.rootstock.io.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Rootstock [Testnet](https://explorer.testnet.rootstock.io)  
```

>   * For mainnet (for production), use this URL: https://explorer.rootstock.io.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Rootstock [Mainnet](https://explorer.rootstock.io)
```

**Example**:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```text
```

NEXT_PUBLIC_EXPLORER=https://explorer.testnet.rootstock.io
```

>  This variable allows your app to link to transaction history directly on the explorer, providing a user-friendly way to verify actions on the blockchain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This variable enables your app to directly link to transaction details on the blockchain explorer, offering a seamless user experience for verifying blockchain activity.
```

> #### **4. NEXT_PUBLIC_PINATA_URL**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### 4. NEXT_PUBLIC_PINATA_URL
```

> This is the URL to Pinata, an IPFS (InterPlanetary File System) provider, which will be used to store and retrieve metadata related to teams and votes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, you can find the URL to Pinata - an IPFS (InterPlanetary File System) provider, which will be used to store and retrieve metadata related to teams and votes.
```

<figure>
<img src="/img/resources/tutorials/governance-dashaboard/NEXT_PUBLIC_PINATA_URL.png" alt="NEXT_PUBLIC_PINATA_URL"/>
  <figcaption>NEXT_PUBLIC_PINATA_URL (fig 2.)</figcaption>
</figure>

> * **How to get it**:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **How to get the URL**:  
```

>   * Start by logging into your Pinata Cloud account and navigate to the dashboard [Pinata](https://www.pinata.cloud/).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Log into your Pinata Cloud account and navigate to the [dashboard](https://www.pinata.cloud/).  
```

  * In the dashboard, click on the **"Files"** tab to access the file storage area.  
  * Click the **"Upload"** button and select a sample image file from your device to upload.  
  * After the upload is complete, locate the uploaded image in the file list. You’ll see a **URL** provided by Pinata that can be used to access your file.  

For example:

```
https://emerald-familiar-cobra-431.mypinata.cloud/ipfs/QmVsBy3vo9tmbjYmFNCiRwAvCBU7p9peEEgyR9awJg4Tyj
```

  * The base URL is the part of the file URL before the unique CID (Content Identifier). In this example, the base URL is:

> ```

Reviewer: Remove url from code block, use a link instead. Same with above and below example

https://emerald-familiar-cobra-431.mypinata.cloud/ipfs/
```

>   * To display images or files from Pinata Cloud on your frontend, simply append the CID to the base URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * To display the images or files from Pinata Cloud on the frontend, simply append the CID to the base URL.
```

**Example:**

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```text
```

NEXT_PUBLIC_PINATA_URL=<Your_Pinata_URL>
```
:::note

> IPFS helps in securely storing data in a decentralized way, and Pinata simplifies accessing this data on IPFS in your dApp.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IPFS helps to secure store data in a decentralized way, and Pinata simplifies access to this data on IPFS in your dApp.
```

:::

> #### **5. NEXT_PUBLIC_GOVERNANCE_TOKEN**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### 5. NEXT_PUBLIC_GOVERNANCE_TOKEN
```

>  This is the address of the ERC20 governance token that users will use to vote. ERC20 tokens are a standard token type on Ethereum-compatible networks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the address of the ERC20 governance token that users will use to vote. ERC20 tokens are a standard token type on Ethereum-compatible networks.
```

> * #### **How to get it:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* #### Get the governance token address
```

  *  If you already have a governance token contract, you can deploy it on the Rootstock network, similar to the TeamsManager contract.

>   *  Otherwise, you can use an existing ERC20 token address if one has been provided for the governance purposes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  *  Alternatively, if an existing ERC20 token address has been provided for governance purposes, you can use that directly.
```

> #### **Example:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example
```

```
NEXT_PUBLIC_GOVERNANCE_TOKEN=<Your_Governance_Token_Address>
```

> #### **Complete environment:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### View the complete environment
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```text
```

NEXT_PUBLIC_TEAM_MANAGER_ADDRESS=<Your_Team_Manager_Contract_Address>
NEXT_PUBLIC_RPC_URL=<Your_Rootstock_RPC_URL>
NEXT_PUBLIC_EXPLORER=https://explorer.testnet.rootstock.io
NEXT_PUBLIC_PINATA_URL=<Your_Pinata_URL>
NEXT_PUBLIC_GOVERNANCE_TOKEN=<Your_Governance_Token_Address>
```
  </Step>

<Step title="Start the Development Server">
   Launch the development server with:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```js
```

npm run dev
```

Open [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000) in your browser to view the voting dashboard.

<figure>
<img src="/img/resources/tutorials/governance-dashaboard/Development-Server.png" alt="development server "/>
  <figcaption>Development server  (fig 3.)</figcaption>
</figure>
  </Step>
  
</Steps>

> ## **Interacting with the Frontend**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Interacting with the Frontend
```

<Steps>
<Step title="Connect Your Wallet">

  * Click the **Connect Wallet** button in the top-right corner.  
  * Choose your Web3 wallet `(e.g., MetaMask)` and connect it to the Rootstock network.  

>   * Make sure your wallet is funded with some governance for voting and RBTC tokens to cover transaction fees.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Make sure your wallet is funded with some governance tokens for voting and RBTC tokens to cover transaction fees.
```

</Step>
<Step title="Explore the Teams">
 <figure>
  <img src="/img/resources/tutorials/governance-dashaboard/Explore-the-Teams.png" alt="Explore the Teams"/>
  <figcaption>Explore the Teams (fig 4.)</figcaption>
 </figure>

>  * Browse through the list of teams in the **Teams List** section.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * Explore the list of teams in the **Teams List** section.
```

 * For each team, you can view:  
   - **Logo**: Visual representation or meme associated with the team.  
   - **Team Name**: Helps identify each team uniquely.  
   - **Symbol**: Represents the token each team uses for voting.  
   - **Leader Address**: Shows the team leader’s wallet address.  
   - **Meme Token Address**: Address of the token associated with the team.  
   - **Score**: The number of votes the team has received.  
 * This information helps you decide which team to support with your vote.

</Step>
   <Step title="Vote for a Team">
    <figure>
<img src="/img/resources/tutorials/governance-dashaboard/Vote-Team.png" alt="Vote for a Team"/>
  <figcaption>Vote for a Team (fig 5.)</figcaption>
</figure>

 * To vote, find the team you want to support and click the **Vote** button in the **Option** column.  
 * You will see a pop up screen with a field to add the amount to vote and an Add vote button.  

>  * Confirm the transaction in your wallet. You’ll need `governance tokens` to cast your vote and a small amount of `RBTC tokens` for transaction fees.  

Reviewer: Add inpage link to how to get the governance token

Author: We dont have this on this doc, do you want me to reference external content?

Reviewer: If its available yes, how is the governance token generated then that is used for the voting?

Author: Its long process that in involves creating your erc20 then mint tokens to it. (But its something we can write about, as a new long form article )

This is a sample https://docs.alchemy.com/docs/how-to-create-a-dao-governance-token

 * Once confirmed, your vote will be registered, and the team’s score will update to reflect your support. 

  </Step>
  <Step title="Check the Scores">
    * After voting, you’ll see the **Score** column update with the new total votes.  
    * The scores reflect the level of community support each team has received.

  </Step>
   <Step title="Adding a Team (For Administrators)">
     <figure>
<img src="/img/resources/tutorials/governance-dashaboard/Add-Team.png" alt="Adding a Team"/>
  <figcaption>Adding a Team (fig 6.)</figcaption>
</figure>

 * If you have administrative privileges, you can add a new team by clicking the **Add Team** button.  
 * Enter the following details to create a new team:  
   * **Team Name**: A unique name for the team.  
   * **Meme Token Address**: Address of the meme token associated with the team.  
   * **Team Leader Address**: Wallet address of the team leader.  
 * Once added, the new team will appear in the Teams List, and users can start voting for it.

  </Step>
</Steps>

> ## Conclusion

Reviewer: This is not a conclusion, kindly reword
